# ALBANIAN

Mbasi njohja e dinjitetit të lindur të të drejtave të barabarta dhe të
patjetërsueshme të të gjithë anëtarëve të familjes njerëzore është themeli i
lirisë, drejtësisë dhe paqes në botë; mbasi mosrespektimi dhe përbuzja e të
drejtave të njeriut ka cuar drejt akteve barbare, të cilat kanë ofenduar
ndërgjegjen e njerëzimit, dhe mbasi krijimi i botës në të cilën njerëzit do të
gëzojnë lirinë e fjalës, të besimit dhe lirinë nga frika e skamja është
proklamuar si dëshira më e lartë e cdo njeriu; mbasi është e nevojshme që të
drejtat e njeriut të mbrohen me dispozita juridike, kështu që njeriu të mos
jetë i shtrënguar që në pikën e fundit t’i përvishet kryengritjes kundër
tiranisë dhe shtypjes; mbasi është e nevojshme që të nxitet zhvillimi i
marrëdhënieve miqësore midis kombeve; mbasi popujt e Kombeve të Bashkuara
vërtetuan përsëri në Kartë besimin e tyre në të drejtat themelore të njeriut,
në dinjitetin dhe vlerën e personit të njeriut dhe barazinë midis burrave dhe
grave dhe mbasi vendosën që të nxitin përparimin shoqëror dhe të përmirësojnë
nivelin e jetës në liri të plotë; mbasi shtetet anëtare u detyruan që, në
bashkëpunim me Kombet

MBASI NJOHJA E DINJITETIT TË LINDUR TË TË DREJTAVE TË BARABARTA DHE TË
PATJETËRSUESHME TË TË GJITHË ANËTARËVE TË FAMILJES NJERËZORE ËSHTË THEMELI I
LIRISË, DREJTËSISË DHE PAQES NË BOTË; MBASI MOSRESPEKTIMI DHE PËRBUZJA E TË
DREJTAVE TË NJERIUT KA CUAR DREJT AKTEVE BARBARE, TË CILAT KANË OFENDUAR
NDËRGJEGJEN E NJERËZIMIT, DHE MBASI KRIJIMI I BOTËS NË TË CILËN NJERËZIT DO TË
GËZOJNË LIRINË E FJALËS, TË BESIMIT DHE LIRINË NGA FRIKA E SKAMJA ËSHTË
PROKLAMUAR SI DËSHIRA MË E LARTË E CDO NJERIU; MBASI ËSHTË E NEVOJSHME QË TË
DREJTAT E NJERIUT TË MBROHEN ME DISPOZITA JURIDIKE, KËSHTU QË NJERIU TË MOS
JETË I SHTRËNGUAR QË NË PIKËN E FUNDIT T’I PËRVISHET KRYENGRITJES KUNDËR
TIRANISË DHE SHTYPJES; MBASI ËSHTË E NEVOJSHME QË TË NXITET ZHVILLIMI I
MARRËDHËNIEVE MIQËSORE MIDIS KOMBEVE; MBASI POPUJT E KOMBEVE TË BASHKUARA
VËRTETUAN PËRSËRI NË KARTË BESIMIN E TYRE NË TË DREJTAT THEMELORE TË NJERIUT,
NË DINJITETIN DHE VLERËN E PERSONIT TË NJERIUT DHE BARAZINË MIDIS BURRAVE DHE
GRAVE DHE MBASI VENDOSËN QË TË NXITIN PËRPARIMIN SHOQËROR DHE TË PËRMIRËSOJNË
NIVELIN E JETËS NË LIRI TË PLOTË; MBASI SHTETET ANËTARE U DETYRUAN QË, NË
BASHKËPUNIM ME KOMBET



# DUTCH (NEDERLANDS)

Overwegende, dat erkenning van de inherente waardigheid en van de gelijke en
onvervreemdbare rechten van alle leden van de mensengemeenschap grondslag is
voor de vrijheid, gerechtigheid en vrede in de wereld; overwegende, dat
terzijdestelling van en minachting voor de rechten van de mens geleid hebben
tot barbaarse handelingen, die het geweten van de mensheid geweld hebben
aangedaan en dat de komst van een wereld, waarin de mensen vrijheid van
meningsuiting en geloof zullen genieten, en vrij zullen zijn van vrees en
gebrek, is verkondigd als het hoogste ideaal van iedere mens; overwegende, dat
het van het grootste belang is, dat de rechten van de mens beschermd worden
door de suprematie van het recht, opdat de mens niet gedwongen worde om in
laatste instantie zijn toevlucht te nemen tot opstand tegen tyrannie en
onderdrukking; overwegende, dat het van het grootste belang is om de
ontwikkeling van vriendschappelijke betrekkingen tussen de naties te
bevorderen; overwegende, dat de volkeren van de Verenigde Naties in het
Handvest hun vertrouwen in de fundamentele rechten van de

OVERWEGENDE, DAT ERKENNING VAN DE INHERENTE WAARDIGHEID EN VAN DE GELIJKE EN
ONVERVREEMDBARE RECHTEN VAN ALLE LEDEN VAN DE MENSENGEMEENSCHAP GRONDSLAG IS
VOOR DE VRIJHEID, GERECHTIGHEID EN VREDE IN DE WERELD; OVERWEGENDE, DAT
TERZIJDESTELLING VAN EN MINACHTING VOOR DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS GELEID HEBBEN
TOT BARBAARSE HANDELINGEN, DIE HET GEWETEN VAN DE MENSHEID GEWELD HEBBEN
AANGEDAAN EN DAT DE KOMST VAN EEN WERELD, WAARIN DE MENSEN VRIJHEID VAN
MENINGSUITING EN GELOOF ZULLEN GENIETEN, EN VRIJ ZULLEN ZIJN VAN VREES EN
GEBREK, IS VERKONDIGD ALS HET HOOGSTE IDEAAL VAN IEDERE MENS; OVERWEGENDE, DAT
HET VAN HET GROOTSTE BELANG IS, DAT DE RECHTEN VAN DE MENS BESCHERMD WORDEN
DOOR DE SUPREMATIE VAN HET RECHT, OPDAT DE MENS NIET GEDWONGEN WORDE OM IN
LAATSTE INSTANTIE ZIJN TOEVLUCHT TE NEMEN TOT OPSTAND TEGEN TYRANNIE EN
ONDERDRUKKING; OVERWEGENDE, DAT HET VAN HET GROOTSTE BELANG IS OM DE
ONTWIKKELING VAN VRIENDSCHAPPELIJKE BETREKKINGEN TUSSEN DE NATIES TE
BEVORDEREN; OVERWEGENDE, DAT DE VOLKEREN VAN DE VERENIGDE NATIES IN HET
HANDVEST HUN VERTROUWEN IN DE FUNDAMENTELE RECHTEN VAN DE



# ESTONIAN

Pidades silmas, et inimkonna kõigi liikmete väärikuse, nende võrdsuse ning
võõrandamatute õiguste tunnustamine on vabaduse, õigluse ja üldise rahu alus;
ja pidades silmas, et inimõiguste põlastamine ja hülgamine on viinud
barbaarsusteni, mis piinavad inimkonna südametunnistust, ja et sellise maailma
loomine, kus inimestel on veendumuste ja sõnavabadus ning kus nad ei tarvitse
tunda hirmu ega puudust, on inimeste üllaks püüdluseks kuulutatud; ja pidades
silmas vajadust, et inimõigusi kaitseks seaduse võim selleks, et inimene ei
oleks sunnitud viimase abinõuna üles tõusma türannia ja rõhumise vastu; ja
pidades silmas, et on vaja kaasa aidata sõbralike suhete arendamisele rahvaste
vahel ja; pidades silmas,et ühinenud rahvaste perre kuuluvad rahavad on
põhikirjas kinnitanud oma usku inimese põhiõigustesse, inimisiksuse väärikusse
ja väärtusse ning meeste ja naiste võrdõiguslikkusesse ning on otsustanud kaasa
aidata sotsiaalsele progressile ja elutingimuste parandamisele suurema vabaduse
juures; ja pidades silmas,et liikmesriigid on kohustatud koostöös Ühinenud
Rahvaste

PIDADES SILMAS, ET INIMKONNA KÕIGI LIIKMETE VÄÄRIKUSE, NENDE VÕRDSUSE NING
VÕÕRANDAMATUTE ÕIGUSTE TUNNUSTAMINE ON VABADUSE, ÕIGLUSE JA ÜLDISE RAHU ALUS;
JA PIDADES SILMAS, ET INIMÕIGUSTE PÕLASTAMINE JA HÜLGAMINE ON VIINUD
BARBAARSUSTENI, MIS PIINAVAD INIMKONNA SÜDAMETUNNISTUST, JA ET SELLISE MAAILMA
LOOMINE, KUS INIMESTEL ON VEENDUMUSTE JA SÕNAVABADUS NING KUS NAD EI TARVITSE
TUNDA HIRMU EGA PUUDUST, ON INIMESTE ÜLLAKS PÜÜDLUSEKS KUULUTATUD; JA PIDADES
SILMAS VAJADUST, ET INIMÕIGUSI KAITSEKS SEADUSE VÕIM SELLEKS, ET INIMENE EI
OLEKS SUNNITUD VIIMASE ABINÕUNA ÜLES TÕUSMA TÜRANNIA JA RÕHUMISE VASTU; JA
PIDADES SILMAS, ET ON VAJA KAASA AIDATA SÕBRALIKE SUHETE ARENDAMISELE RAHVASTE
VAHEL JA; PIDADES SILMAS,ET ÜHINENUD RAHVASTE PERRE KUULUVAD RAHAVAD ON
PÕHIKIRJAS KINNITANUD OMA USKU INIMESE PÕHIÕIGUSTESSE, INIMISIKSUSE VÄÄRIKUSSE
JA VÄÄRTUSSE NING MEESTE JA NAISTE VÕRDÕIGUSLIKKUSESSE NING ON OTSUSTANUD KAASA
AIDATA SOTSIAALSELE PROGRESSILE JA ELUTINGIMUSTE PARANDAMISELE SUUREMA VABADUSE
JUURES; JA PIDADES SILMAS,ET LIIKMESRIIGID ON KOHUSTATUD KOOSTÖÖS ÜHINENUD
RAHVASTE



# FINNISH (SUOMI)

Kun ihmiskunnan kaikkien jäsenten luonnollisen arvon ja heidän yhtäläisten ja
luovuttamattomien oikeuksiensa tunnustaminen on vapauden, oikeudenmukaisuuden
ja rauhan perustana maailmassa, kun ihmisoikeuksia on väheksytty tai ne on
jätetty huomiota vaille, on tapahtunut raakalaistekoja, jotka ovat järkyttäneet
ihmiskunnan omaatuntoa, ja kun kansojen korkeimmaksi päämääräksi on julistettu
sellaisen maailman luominen, missä ihmiset voivat vapaasti nauttia sanan ja
uskon vapautta sekä elää vapaina pelosta ja puutteesta, kun on välttämätöntä,
että ihmisoikeudet turvataan oikeusjärjestyksellä, jotta ihmisten ei olisi
pakko viimeisenä keinona nousta kapinaan pakkovaltaa ja sortoa vastaan, kun on
tähdellistä edistää ystävällisten suhteiden kehittymistä kansojen välille, kun
Yhdistyneiden Kansakuntien kansat ovat peruskirjassa vahvistaneet uskonsa
ihmisten perusoikeuksiin, ihmisyksilön arvoon ja merkitykseen sekä miesten ja
naisten yhtäläisiin oikeuksiin ja kun ne ovat ilmaisseet vakaan tahtonsa
edistää sosiaalista kehitystä ja parempien elämisen ehtojen aikaansaamista
vapaammissa oloissa

KUN IHMISKUNNAN KAIKKIEN JÄSENTEN LUONNOLLISEN ARVON JA HEIDÄN YHTÄLÄISTEN JA
LUOVUTTAMATTOMIEN OIKEUKSIENSA TUNNUSTAMINEN ON VAPAUDEN, OIKEUDENMUKAISUUDEN
JA RAUHAN PERUSTANA MAAILMASSA, KUN IHMISOIKEUKSIA ON VÄHEKSYTTY TAI NE ON
JÄTETTY HUOMIOTA VAILLE, ON TAPAHTUNUT RAAKALAISTEKOJA, JOTKA OVAT JÄRKYTTÄNEET
IHMISKUNNAN OMAATUNTOA, JA KUN KANSOJEN KORKEIMMAKSI PÄÄMÄÄRÄKSI ON JULISTETTU
SELLAISEN MAAILMAN LUOMINEN, MISSÄ IHMISET VOIVAT VAPAASTI NAUTTIA SANAN JA
USKON VAPAUTTA SEKÄ ELÄÄ VAPAINA PELOSTA JA PUUTTEESTA, KUN ON VÄLTTÄMÄTÖNTÄ,
ETTÄ IHMISOIKEUDET TURVATAAN OIKEUSJÄRJESTYKSELLÄ, JOTTA IHMISTEN EI OLISI
PAKKO VIIMEISENÄ KEINONA NOUSTA KAPINAAN PAKKOVALTAA JA SORTOA VASTAAN, KUN ON
TÄHDELLISTÄ EDISTÄÄ YSTÄVÄLLISTEN SUHTEIDEN KEHITTYMISTÄ KANSOJEN VÄLILLE, KUN
YHDISTYNEIDEN KANSAKUNTIEN KANSAT OVAT PERUSKIRJASSA VAHVISTANEET USKONSA
IHMISTEN PERUSOIKEUKSIIN, IHMISYKSILÖN ARVOON JA MERKITYKSEEN SEKÄ MIESTEN JA
NAISTEN YHTÄLÄISIIN OIKEUKSIIN JA KUN NE OVAT ILMAISSEET VAKAAN TAHTONSA
EDISTÄÄ SOSIAALISTA KEHITYSTÄ JA PAREMPIEN ELÄMISEN EHTOJEN AIKAANSAAMISTA
VAPAAMMISSA OLOISSA



# FRENCH (FRANÇAIS)

Considérant que la reconnaissance de la dignité inhérente à tous les membres de
la famille humaine et de leurs droits égaux et inaliénables constitue le
fondement de la liberté, de la justice et de la paix dans le monde, considérant
que la méconnaissance et le mépris des droits de l’homme ont conduit à des
actes de barbarie qui révoltent la conscience de l’humanité et que l’avènement
d’un monde où les êtres humains seront libres de parler et de croire, libérés
de la terreur et de la misère, a été proclamé comme la plus haute aspiration de
l’homme, considérant qu’il est essentiel que les droits de l’homme soient
protégés par un régime de droit pour que l’homme ne soit pas contraint, en
suprême recours, à la révolte contre la tyrannie et l’oppression, considérant
qu’il est essentiel d’encourager le développement de relations amicales entre
nations, considérant que dans la charte les peuples des Nations Unies ont
proclamé à nouveau leur foi dans les droits fondamentaux de l’homme, dans la
dignité et la valeur de la personne humaine, dans l’égalité des droits des
hommes et des femmes, et qu’ils se sont déclarés résolus à favoriser le progrès
social

CONSIDÉRANT QUE LA RECONNAISSANCE DE LA DIGNITÉ INHÉRENTE À TOUS LES MEMBRES DE
LA FAMILLE HUMAINE ET DE LEURS DROITS ÉGAUX ET INALIÉNABLES CONSTITUE LE
FONDEMENT DE LA LIBERTÉ, DE LA JUSTICE ET DE LA PAIX DANS LE MONDE, CONSIDÉRANT
QUE LA MÉCONNAISSANCE ET LE MÉPRIS DES DROITS DE L’HOMME ONT CONDUIT À DES
ACTES DE BARBARIE QUI RÉVOLTENT LA CONSCIENCE DE L’HUMANITÉ ET QUE L’AVÈNEMENT
D’UN MONDE OÙ LES ÊTRES HUMAINS SERONT LIBRES DE PARLER ET DE CROIRE, LIBÉRÉS
DE LA TERREUR ET DE LA MISÈRE, A ÉTÉ PROCLAMÉ COMME LA PLUS HAUTE ASPIRATION DE
L’HOMME, CONSIDÉRANT QU’IL EST ESSENTIEL QUE LES DROITS DE L’HOMME SOIENT
PROTÉGÉS PAR UN RÉGIME DE DROIT POUR QUE L’HOMME NE SOIT PAS CONTRAINT, EN
SUPRÊME RECOURS, À LA RÉVOLTE CONTRE LA TYRANNIE ET L’OPPRESSION, CONSIDÉRANT
QU’IL EST ESSENTIEL D’ENCOURAGER LE DÉVELOPPEMENT DE RELATIONS AMICALES ENTRE
NATIONS, CONSIDÉRANT QUE DANS LA CHARTE LES PEUPLES DES NATIONS UNIES ONT
PROCLAMÉ À NOUVEAU LEUR FOI DANS LES DROITS FONDAMENTAUX DE L’HOMME, DANS LA
DIGNITÉ ET LA VALEUR DE LA PERSONNE HUMAINE, DANS L’ÉGALITÉ DES DROITS DES
HOMMES ET DES FEMMES, ET QU’ILS SE SONT DÉCLARÉS RÉSOLUS À FAVORISER LE PROGRÈS
SOCIAL



# GERMAN (DEUTSCH)

Da die Anerkennung der angeborenen Würde und der gleichen und unveräußerlichen
Rechte aller Mitglieder der Gemeinschaft der Menschen die Grundlage von
Freiheit, Gerechtigkeit und Frieden in der Welt bildet, da die Nichtanerkennung
und Verachtung der Menschenrechte zu Akten der Barbarei geführt haben, die das
Gewissen der Menschheit mit Empörung erfüllen, und da verkündet worden ist, daß
einer Welt, in der die Menschen Rede- und Glaubensfreiheit und Freiheit von
Furcht und Not genießen, das höchste Streben des Menschen gilt, da es notwendig
ist, die Menschenrechte durch die Herrschaft des Rechtes zu schützen, damit der
Mensch nicht gezwungen wird, als letztes Mittel zum Aufstand gegen Tyrannei und
Unterdrückung zu greifen, da es notwendig ist, die Entwicklung
freundschaftlicher Beziehungen zwischen den Nationen zu fördern, da die Völker
der Vereinten Nationen in der Charta ihren Glauben an die grundlegenden
Menschenrechte, an die Würde und den Wert der menschlichen Person und an die
Gleichberechtigung von Mann und Frau erneut bekräftigt und beschlossen haben,
den sozialen

DA DIE ANERKENNUNG DER ANGEBORENEN WÜRDE UND DER GLEICHEN UND UNVERÄUẞERLICHEN
RECHTE ALLER MITGLIEDER DER GEMEINSCHAFT DER MENSCHEN DIE GRUNDLAGE VON
FREIHEIT, GERECHTIGKEIT UND FRIEDEN IN DER WELT BILDET, DA DIE NICHTANERKENNUNG
UND VERACHTUNG DER MENSCHENRECHTE ZU AKTEN DER BARBAREI GEFÜHRT HABEN, DIE DAS
GEWISSEN DER MENSCHHEIT MIT EMPÖRUNG ERFÜLLEN, UND DA VERKÜNDET WORDEN IST, DAẞ
EINER WELT, IN DER DIE MENSCHEN REDE- UND GLAUBENSFREIHEIT UND FREIHEIT VON
FURCHT UND NOT GENIEẞEN, DAS HÖCHSTE STREBEN DES MENSCHEN GILT, DA ES NOTWENDIG
IST, DIE MENSCHENRECHTE DURCH DIE HERRSCHAFT DES RECHTES ZU SCHÜTZEN, DAMIT DER
MENSCH NICHT GEZWUNGEN WIRD, ALS LETZTES MITTEL ZUM AUFSTAND GEGEN TYRANNEI UND
UNTERDRÜCKUNG ZU GREIFEN, DA ES NOTWENDIG IST, DIE ENTWICKLUNG
FREUNDSCHAFTLICHER BEZIEHUNGEN ZWISCHEN DEN NATIONEN ZU FÖRDERN, DA DIE VÖLKER
DER VEREINTEN NATIONEN IN DER CHARTA IHREN GLAUBEN AN DIE GRUNDLEGENDEN
MENSCHENRECHTE, AN DIE WÜRDE UND DEN WERT DER MENSCHLICHEN PERSON UND AN DIE
GLEICHBERECHTIGUNG VON MANN UND FRAU ERNEUT BEKRÄFTIGT UND BESCHLOSSEN HABEN,
DEN SOZIALEN



# HUNGARIAN

Tekintettel arra, hogy az emberiség családja minden egyes tagja méltóságának,
valamint egyenlő és elidegeníthetetlen jogainak elismerése alkotja a szabadság,
az igazság és a béke alapját a világon, tekintettel arra, hogy az emberi jogok
el nem ismerése és semmibevevése az emberiség lelkiismeretét fellázító barbár
cselekményekhez vezetett, és hogy az ember legfőbb vágya egy olyan világ
eljövetele, amelyben az elnyomástól, valamint a nyomortól megszabadult emberi
lények szava és meggyőződése szabad lesz, tekintettel annak fontosságára, hogy
az emberi jogokat a jog uralma védelmezze, nehogy az ember végső szükségében a
zsarnokság és az elnyomás elleni lázadásra kényszerüljön, tekintettel arra,
hogy igen lényeges a nemzetek közötti baráti kapcsolatok kifejeződésének
előmozdítása, tekintettel arra, hogy az Alapokmányban az Egyesült Nemzetek
népei újból hitet tettek az alapvető emberi jogok, az emberi személyiség
méltósága és értéke, a férfiak és nők egyenjogúsága mellett, valamint
kinyilvánították azt az elhatározásukat, hogy elősegítik a szociális haladást
és nagyobb szabadság mellett

TEKINTETTEL ARRA, HOGY AZ EMBERISÉG CSALÁDJA MINDEN EGYES TAGJA MÉLTÓSÁGÁNAK,
VALAMINT EGYENLŐ ÉS ELIDEGENÍTHETETLEN JOGAINAK ELISMERÉSE ALKOTJA A SZABADSÁG,
AZ IGAZSÁG ÉS A BÉKE ALAPJÁT A VILÁGON, TEKINTETTEL ARRA, HOGY AZ EMBERI JOGOK
EL NEM ISMERÉSE ÉS SEMMIBEVEVÉSE AZ EMBERISÉG LELKIISMERETÉT FELLÁZÍTÓ BARBÁR
CSELEKMÉNYEKHEZ VEZETETT, ÉS HOGY AZ EMBER LEGFŐBB VÁGYA EGY OLYAN VILÁG
ELJÖVETELE, AMELYBEN AZ ELNYOMÁSTÓL, VALAMINT A NYOMORTÓL MEGSZABADULT EMBERI
LÉNYEK SZAVA ÉS MEGGYŐZŐDÉSE SZABAD LESZ, TEKINTETTEL ANNAK FONTOSSÁGÁRA, HOGY
AZ EMBERI JOGOKAT A JOG URALMA VÉDELMEZZE, NEHOGY AZ EMBER VÉGSŐ SZÜKSÉGÉBEN A
ZSARNOKSÁG ÉS AZ ELNYOMÁS ELLENI LÁZADÁSRA KÉNYSZERÜLJÖN, TEKINTETTEL ARRA,
HOGY IGEN LÉNYEGES A NEMZETEK KÖZÖTTI BARÁTI KAPCSOLATOK KIFEJEZŐDÉSÉNEK
ELŐMOZDÍTÁSA, TEKINTETTEL ARRA, HOGY AZ ALAPOKMÁNYBAN AZ EGYESÜLT NEMZETEK
NÉPEI ÚJBÓL HITET TETTEK AZ ALAPVETŐ EMBERI JOGOK, AZ EMBERI SZEMÉLYISÉG
MÉLTÓSÁGA ÉS ÉRTÉKE, A FÉRFIAK ÉS NŐK EGYENJOGÚSÁGA MELLETT, VALAMINT
KINYILVÁNÍTOTTÁK AZT AZ ELHATÁROZÁSUKAT, HOGY ELŐSEGÍTIK A SZOCIÁLIS HALADÁST
ÉS NAGYOBB SZABADSÁG MELLETT



# ICELANDIC (ÍSLENSKA)

Það ber að viðurkenna, að hver maður sé jafnborinn til virðingar og réttinda,
er eigi verði af honum tekin, og er þetta undirstaða frelsis, réttlætis og
friðar i heiminum. Hafi mannréttindi verið fyrir borð borin og lítilsvirt,
hefur slíkt haft í för með sér siðlausar athafnir, er ofboðið hafa samvizku
mannkynsins, enda hefur því verið yfir lýst, að æðsta markmið almennings um
heim allan sé að skapa veröld, þar sem menn fái notið málfrelsis, trúfrelsis og
óttaleysis um einkalíf afkomu. Mannréttindi á að vernda með lögum. Að öðrum
kosti hljóta menn að grípa til þess örþrifaráðs að rísa upp gegn kúgun og
ofbeldi. Það er mikilsvert að efla vinsamleg samskipti þjóða í milli. Í
stofnskrá sinni hafa Sameinuðu þjóðdirnar lýst yfir trú sinni á
grundvallaratriði mannréttinda, á göfgi og gildi mannsins og jafnrétti karla og
kvernna, enda munu þær beita sér fyrir félagslegum framförum og betri
lífsafkomu með auknu frelsi manna. Aðildarríkin hafa bundizt samtökum um að
efla almenna virðingu fyrir og gæzlu hinna mikilsverðustu mannréttinda í
samráði við Sameinuðu þjóðirnar. Til þess að slík samtök megi sem

ÞAÐ BER AÐ VIÐURKENNA, AÐ HVER MAÐUR SÉ JAFNBORINN TIL VIRÐINGAR OG RÉTTINDA,
ER EIGI VERÐI AF HONUM TEKIN, OG ER ÞETTA UNDIRSTAÐA FRELSIS, RÉTTLÆTIS OG
FRIÐAR I HEIMINUM. HAFI MANNRÉTTINDI VERIÐ FYRIR BORÐ BORIN OG LÍTILSVIRT,
HEFUR SLÍKT HAFT Í FÖR MEÐ SÉR SIÐLAUSAR ATHAFNIR, ER OFBOÐIÐ HAFA SAMVIZKU
MANNKYNSINS, ENDA HEFUR ÞVÍ VERIÐ YFIR LÝST, AÐ ÆÐSTA MARKMIÐ ALMENNINGS UM
HEIM ALLAN SÉ AÐ SKAPA VERÖLD, ÞAR SEM MENN FÁI NOTIÐ MÁLFRELSIS, TRÚFRELSIS OG
ÓTTALEYSIS UM EINKALÍF AFKOMU. MANNRÉTTINDI Á AÐ VERNDA MEÐ LÖGUM. AÐ ÖÐRUM
KOSTI HLJÓTA MENN AÐ GRÍPA TIL ÞESS ÖRÞRIFARÁÐS AÐ RÍSA UPP GEGN KÚGUN OG
OFBELDI. ÞAÐ ER MIKILSVERT AÐ EFLA VINSAMLEG SAMSKIPTI ÞJÓÐA Í MILLI. Í
STOFNSKRÁ SINNI HAFA SAMEINUÐU ÞJÓÐDIRNAR LÝST YFIR TRÚ SINNI Á
GRUNDVALLARATRIÐI MANNRÉTTINDA, Á GÖFGI OG GILDI MANNSINS OG JAFNRÉTTI KARLA OG
KVERNNA, ENDA MUNU ÞÆR BEITA SÉR FYRIR FÉLAGSLEGUM FRAMFÖRUM OG BETRI
LÍFSAFKOMU MEÐ AUKNU FRELSI MANNA. AÐILDARRÍKIN HAFA BUNDIZT SAMTÖKUM UM AÐ
EFLA ALMENNA VIRÐINGU FYRIR OG GÆZLU HINNA MIKILSVERÐUSTU MANNRÉTTINDA Í
SAMRÁÐI VIÐ SAMEINUÐU ÞJÓÐIRNAR. TIL ÞESS AÐ SLÍK SAMTÖK MEGI SEM



# IRISH

De Bhrí gurb é aithint dínte dúchais agus chearta comhionanna do-shannta an
uile dhuine den chine daonna is foras don tsaorise, don cheartas agus don
tsíocháin sa domhan, de Bhrí gur thionscain a neamhaird agus an mí-mheas ar
chearta an duine gníomhartha barbartha a chuir uafás ar choinsias an chine
daonna, agus go bhfuil forógartha gurb é meanmarc is uaisle ag an gcoitiantacht
saol a thabhairt i réim a bhéarfas don duine saoirse chainte agus chreidimh
agus saoirse ó eagla agus ó amhgar, de Bhrí go ndearna pobail na Náisiúin
Aontaithe sa Chairt dearbhú athuair ar a gcreideamh i gcearta bunúsacha an
duine, i ndínit agus i bhfiúntas pearsan an duine agus i gcearta comhionanna
fear agus bean, agus gur chinneadar tacú leis an ascnamh sóisalach agus réim
maireachtana níos fearr a thabhairt i gcrích faoi shaoirse níos fairsinge, de
Bhrí gur ghabhadar na Stát-Chomhaltaí faoi chuing ghealltanais go ndéanfaid, i
gcomhar leis na Náisiúin Aontaithe, urraim uile-choiteann éifeachtach
d’áirithiú do chearta agus do shaoirsí bunúsacha an duine. De Bhrí go bhfuil sé
fíor-thábhachtach, chun an

DE BHRÍ GURB É AITHINT DÍNTE DÚCHAIS AGUS CHEARTA COMHIONANNA DO-SHANNTA AN
UILE DHUINE DEN CHINE DAONNA IS FORAS DON TSAORISE, DON CHEARTAS AGUS DON
TSÍOCHÁIN SA DOMHAN, DE BHRÍ GUR THIONSCAIN A NEAMHAIRD AGUS AN MÍ-MHEAS AR
CHEARTA AN DUINE GNÍOMHARTHA BARBARTHA A CHUIR UAFÁS AR CHOINSIAS AN CHINE
DAONNA, AGUS GO BHFUIL FORÓGARTHA GURB É MEANMARC IS UAISLE AG AN GCOITIANTACHT
SAOL A THABHAIRT I RÉIM A BHÉARFAS DON DUINE SAOIRSE CHAINTE AGUS CHREIDIMH
AGUS SAOIRSE Ó EAGLA AGUS Ó AMHGAR, DE BHRÍ GO NDEARNA POBAIL NA NÁISIÚIN
AONTAITHE SA CHAIRT DEARBHÚ ATHUAIR AR A GCREIDEAMH I GCEARTA BUNÚSACHA AN
DUINE, I NDÍNIT AGUS I BHFIÚNTAS PEARSAN AN DUINE AGUS I GCEARTA COMHIONANNA
FEAR AGUS BEAN, AGUS GUR CHINNEADAR TACÚ LEIS AN ASCNAMH SÓISALACH AGUS RÉIM
MAIREACHTANA NÍOS FEARR A THABHAIRT I GCRÍCH FAOI SHAOIRSE NÍOS FAIRSINGE, DE
BHRÍ GUR GHABHADAR NA STÁT-CHOMHALTAÍ FAOI CHUING GHEALLTANAIS GO NDÉANFAID, I
GCOMHAR LEIS NA NÁISIÚIN AONTAITHE, URRAIM UILE-CHOITEANN ÉIFEACHTACH
D’ÁIRITHIÚ DO CHEARTA AGUS DO SHAOIRSÍ BUNÚSACHA AN DUINE. DE BHRÍ GO BHFUIL SÉ
FÍOR-THÁBHACHTACH, CHUN AN



# ITALIAN

Considerato che il riconoscimento della dignità inerente a tutti i membri della
famiglia umana e dei loro diritti, uguali ed inalienabili, costituisce il
fondamento della libertà, della giustizia e della pace nel mondo; considerato
che il disconoscimento e il disprezzo dei diritti umani hanno portato ad atti
di barbarie che offendono la coscienza dell’umanità, e che l’avvento di un
mondo in cui gli esseri umani godano della libertà di parola e di credo e della
libertà dal timore e dal bisogno è stato proclamato come la più alta
aspirazione dell’uomo; considerato che è indispensabile che i diritti umani
siano protetti da norme giuridiche, se si vuole evitare che l’uomo sia
costretto a ricorrere, come ultima istanza, alla ribellione contro la tirannia
e l’oppressione; considerato che è indispensabile promuovere lo sviluppo di
rapporti amichevoli tra le Nazioni; considerato che i popoli delle Nazioni
Unite hanno riaffermato nello Statuto la loro fede nei diritti umani
fondamentali, nella dignità e nel valore della persona umana, nell’uguaglianza
dei diritti dell’uomo e della donna, ed hanno deciso di promuovere il progresso
sociale e un miglior tenore di vita in

CONSIDERATO CHE IL RICONOSCIMENTO DELLA DIGNITÀ INERENTE A TUTTI I MEMBRI DELLA
FAMIGLIA UMANA E DEI LORO DIRITTI, UGUALI ED INALIENABILI, COSTITUISCE IL
FONDAMENTO DELLA LIBERTÀ, DELLA GIUSTIZIA E DELLA PACE NEL MONDO; CONSIDERATO
CHE IL DISCONOSCIMENTO E IL DISPREZZO DEI DIRITTI UMANI HANNO PORTATO AD ATTI
DI BARBARIE CHE OFFENDONO LA COSCIENZA DELL’UMANITÀ, E CHE L’AVVENTO DI UN
MONDO IN CUI GLI ESSERI UMANI GODANO DELLA LIBERTÀ DI PAROLA E DI CREDO E DELLA
LIBERTÀ DAL TIMORE E DAL BISOGNO È STATO PROCLAMATO COME LA PIÙ ALTA
ASPIRAZIONE DELL’UOMO; CONSIDERATO CHE È INDISPENSABILE CHE I DIRITTI UMANI
SIANO PROTETTI DA NORME GIURIDICHE, SE SI VUOLE EVITARE CHE L’UOMO SIA
COSTRETTO A RICORRERE, COME ULTIMA ISTANZA, ALLA RIBELLIONE CONTRO LA TIRANNIA
E L’OPPRESSIONE; CONSIDERATO CHE È INDISPENSABILE PROMUOVERE LO SVILUPPO DI
RAPPORTI AMICHEVOLI TRA LE NAZIONI; CONSIDERATO CHE I POPOLI DELLE NAZIONI
UNITE HANNO RIAFFERMATO NELLO STATUTO LA LORO FEDE NEI DIRITTI UMANI
FONDAMENTALI, NELLA DIGNITÀ E NEL VALORE DELLA PERSONA UMANA, NELL’UGUAGLIANZA
DEI DIRITTI DELL’UOMO E DELLA DONNA, ED HANNO DECISO DI PROMUOVERE IL PROGRESSO
SOCIALE E UN MIGLIOR TENORE DI VITA IN



# LITHUANIAN

Kadangi visų žmonių giminės narių prigimtinio orumo ir lygių bei neatimamų
teisių pripažinimas yra laisvės, teisingumo ir taikos pasaulyje pagrindas;
kadangi žmogaus teisių nepaisymas ir niekinimas pastūmėjo vykdyti barbariškus
aktus, kurie papiktino žmonijos sąžinę, ir didžiausiu paprastų žmonių siekiu
buvo paskelbtas pasaulio, kuriame žmonės turi žodžio bei įsitikinimų laisvę ir
yra išlaisvinti iš baimės ir skurdo, sukūrimas; kadangi būtina, kad žmogaus
teises saugotų įstatymo galia, idant žmogus nebūtų priverstas, nerasdamas
jokios kitos išeities, sukilti prieš tironiją ir priespaudą; kadangi būtina
skatinti draugiškų tautų santykių plėtrą; kadangi Jungtinių Tautų Chartijoje
tautos vėl patvirtino savo tikėjimą pagrindinėmis žmogaus teisėmis, žmogaus,
kaip asmenybės, orumu ir vertybe, lygiomis moterų ir vyrų teisėmis ir pasiryžo
skatinti socialinę pažangą bei geresnio gyvenimo didesnės laisvės sąlygomis
siekį; kadangi valstybės narės yra įsipareigojusios bendradarbiaudamos su
Jungtinėmis Tautomis siekti, kad būtų skatinama visuotinė pagarba žmogaus
teisėms ir pagrindinėms laisvėms ir jų būtų paisoma; kadangi bendras šių teisių
ir laisvių supratimas yra nepaprastai svarbus.

KADANGI VISŲ ŽMONIŲ GIMINĖS NARIŲ PRIGIMTINIO ORUMO IR LYGIŲ BEI NEATIMAMŲ
TEISIŲ PRIPAŽINIMAS YRA LAISVĖS, TEISINGUMO IR TAIKOS PASAULYJE PAGRINDAS;
KADANGI ŽMOGAUS TEISIŲ NEPAISYMAS IR NIEKINIMAS PASTŪMĖJO VYKDYTI BARBARIŠKUS
AKTUS, KURIE PAPIKTINO ŽMONIJOS SĄŽINĘ, IR DIDŽIAUSIU PAPRASTŲ ŽMONIŲ SIEKIU
BUVO PASKELBTAS PASAULIO, KURIAME ŽMONĖS TURI ŽODŽIO BEI ĮSITIKINIMŲ LAISVĘ IR
YRA IŠLAISVINTI IŠ BAIMĖS IR SKURDO, SUKŪRIMAS; KADANGI BŪTINA, KAD ŽMOGAUS
TEISES SAUGOTŲ ĮSTATYMO GALIA, IDANT ŽMOGUS NEBŪTŲ PRIVERSTAS, NERASDAMAS
JOKIOS KITOS IŠEITIES, SUKILTI PRIEŠ TIRONIJĄ IR PRIESPAUDĄ; KADANGI BŪTINA
SKATINTI DRAUGIŠKŲ TAUTŲ SANTYKIŲ PLĖTRĄ; KADANGI JUNGTINIŲ TAUTŲ CHARTIJOJE
TAUTOS VĖL PATVIRTINO SAVO TIKĖJIMĄ PAGRINDINĖMIS ŽMOGAUS TEISĖMIS, ŽMOGAUS,
KAIP ASMENYBĖS, ORUMU IR VERTYBE, LYGIOMIS MOTERŲ IR VYRŲ TEISĖMIS IR PASIRYŽO
SKATINTI SOCIALINĘ PAŽANGĄ BEI GERESNIO GYVENIMO DIDESNĖS LAISVĖS SĄLYGOMIS
SIEKĮ; KADANGI VALSTYBĖS NARĖS YRA ĮSIPAREIGOJUSIOS BENDRADARBIAUDAMOS SU
JUNGTINĖMIS TAUTOMIS SIEKTI, KAD BŪTŲ SKATINAMA VISUOTINĖ PAGARBA ŽMOGAUS
TEISĖMS IR PAGRINDINĖMS LAISVĖMS IR JŲ BŪTŲ PAISOMA; KADANGI BENDRAS ŠIŲ TEISIŲ
IR LAISVIŲ SUPRATIMAS YRA NEPAPRASTAI SVARBUS.



# NORWEGIAN, BOKMÅL (NORSK)

Da anerkjennelsen av menneskeverd og like og umistelige rettigheter for alle
medlemmer av menneskeslekten er grunnlaget for frihet, rettferdighet og fred i
verden, da tilsidesettelse av og forakt for menneskerettighetene har ført til
barbariske handlinger som har rystet menneskehetens samvittighet, og da
framveksten av en verden hvor menneskene har tale- og trosfrihet og frihet fra
frykt og nød, er blitt kunngjort som folkenes høyeste mål, da det er nødvendig
at menneskerettighetene blir beskyttet av loven for at menneskene ikke skal
tvinges til som siste utvei å gjøre opprør mot tyranni og undertrykkelse, da
det er viktig å fremme utviklingen av vennskapelige forhold mellom nasjonene,
da De Forente Nasjoners folk i Pakten på ny har bekreftet sin tro på
grunnleggende menneskerettigheter, på menneskeverd og på like rett for menn og
kvinner og har besluttet å arbeide for sosialt framskritt og bedre levevilkår
under større Frihet, da medlemsstatene har forpliktet seg til i samarbeid med
De Forente Nasjoner å sikre at menneskerettighetene og de grunnleggende
friheter blir alminnelig respektert og overholdt, da en allmenn

DA ANERKJENNELSEN AV MENNESKEVERD OG LIKE OG UMISTELIGE RETTIGHETER FOR ALLE
MEDLEMMER AV MENNESKESLEKTEN ER GRUNNLAGET FOR FRIHET, RETTFERDIGHET OG FRED I
VERDEN, DA TILSIDESETTELSE AV OG FORAKT FOR MENNESKERETTIGHETENE HAR FØRT TIL
BARBARISKE HANDLINGER SOM HAR RYSTET MENNESKEHETENS SAMVITTIGHET, OG DA
FRAMVEKSTEN AV EN VERDEN HVOR MENNESKENE HAR TALE- OG TROSFRIHET OG FRIHET FRA
FRYKT OG NØD, ER BLITT KUNNGJORT SOM FOLKENES HØYESTE MÅL, DA DET ER NØDVENDIG
AT MENNESKERETTIGHETENE BLIR BESKYTTET AV LOVEN FOR AT MENNESKENE IKKE SKAL
TVINGES TIL SOM SISTE UTVEI Å GJØRE OPPRØR MOT TYRANNI OG UNDERTRYKKELSE, DA
DET ER VIKTIG Å FREMME UTVIKLINGEN AV VENNSKAPELIGE FORHOLD MELLOM NASJONENE,
DA DE FORENTE NASJONERS FOLK I PAKTEN PÅ NY HAR BEKREFTET SIN TRO PÅ
GRUNNLEGGENDE MENNESKERETTIGHETER, PÅ MENNESKEVERD OG PÅ LIKE RETT FOR MENN OG
KVINNER OG HAR BESLUTTET Å ARBEIDE FOR SOSIALT FRAMSKRITT OG BEDRE LEVEVILKÅR
UNDER STØRRE FRIHET, DA MEDLEMSSTATENE HAR FORPLIKTET SEG TIL I SAMARBEID MED
DE FORENTE NASJONER Å SIKRE AT MENNESKERETTIGHETENE OG DE GRUNNLEGGENDE
FRIHETER BLIR ALMINNELIG RESPEKTERT OG OVERHOLDT, DA EN ALLMENN



# POLISH (POLSKI)

Zważywszy, że uznanie przyrodzonej godności oraz równych i niezbywalnych praw
wszystkich członków wspólnoty ludzkiej jest podstawą wolności, sprawiedliwości
i pokoju świata, zważywszy, że nieposzanowanie i nieprzestrzeganie praw
człowieka doprowadziło do aktów barbarzyństwa, które wstrząsnęły sumieniem
ludzkości, i że ogłoszono uroczyście jako najwznioślejszy cel ludzkości dążenie
do zbudowania takiego świata, w którym ludzie korzystać będą z wolności słowa i
przekonań oraz z wolności od strachu i nędzy, zważywszy, że konieczne jest
zawarowanie praw człowieka przepisami prawa, aby nie musiał—doprowadzony do
ostateczności—uciekać się do buntu przeciw tyranii i uciskowi, zważywszy, że
konieczne jest popieranie rozwoju przyjaznych stosunków między narodami,
zważywszy, że Narody Zjednoczone przywróciły swą wiarę w podstawowe prawa
człowieka, godność i wartość jednostki oraz w równouprawnienie mężczyzn i
kobiet, oraz wyraziły swe zdecydowanie popierania postępu społecznego i poprawy
warunków życia w większej wolności, zważywszy, że Państwa Członkowskie

ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE UZNANIE PRZYRODZONEJ GODNOŚCI ORAZ RÓWNYCH I NIEZBYWALNYCH PRAW
WSZYSTKICH CZŁONKÓW WSPÓLNOTY LUDZKIEJ JEST PODSTAWĄ WOLNOŚCI, SPRAWIEDLIWOŚCI
I POKOJU ŚWIATA, ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE NIEPOSZANOWANIE I NIEPRZESTRZEGANIE PRAW
CZŁOWIEKA DOPROWADZIŁO DO AKTÓW BARBARZYŃSTWA, KTÓRE WSTRZĄSNĘŁY SUMIENIEM
LUDZKOŚCI, I ŻE OGŁOSZONO UROCZYŚCIE JAKO NAJWZNIOŚLEJSZY CEL LUDZKOŚCI DĄŻENIE
DO ZBUDOWANIA TAKIEGO ŚWIATA, W KTÓRYM LUDZIE KORZYSTAĆ BĘDĄ Z WOLNOŚCI SŁOWA I
PRZEKONAŃ ORAZ Z WOLNOŚCI OD STRACHU I NĘDZY, ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE KONIECZNE JEST
ZAWAROWANIE PRAW CZŁOWIEKA PRZEPISAMI PRAWA, ABY NIE MUSIAŁ—DOPROWADZONY DO
OSTATECZNOŚCI—UCIEKAĆ SIĘ DO BUNTU PRZECIW TYRANII I UCISKOWI, ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE
KONIECZNE JEST POPIERANIE ROZWOJU PRZYJAZNYCH STOSUNKÓW MIĘDZY NARODAMI,
ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE NARODY ZJEDNOCZONE PRZYWRÓCIŁY SWĄ WIARĘ W PODSTAWOWE PRAWA
CZŁOWIEKA, GODNOŚĆ I WARTOŚĆ JEDNOSTKI ORAZ W RÓWNOUPRAWNIENIE MĘŻCZYZN I
KOBIET, ORAZ WYRAZIŁY SWE ZDECYDOWANIE POPIERANIA POSTĘPU SPOŁECZNEGO I POPRAWY
WARUNKÓW ŻYCIA W WIĘKSZEJ WOLNOŚCI, ZWAŻYWSZY, ŻE PAŃSTWA CZŁONKOWSKIE



# PORTUGUESE

Considerando que o reconhecimento da dignidade inerente a todos os membros da
família humana e dos seus direitos iguais e inalienáveis constitui o fundamento
da liberdade, da justiça e da paz no mundo; considerando que o desconhecimento
e o desprezo dos direitos do Homen conduziram a actos de barbárie que revoltam
a consciência daHumanidade e que o advento de um mundo em que os seres humanos
sejam livres de falar e de crer, libertos do terror e da miséria, foi
proclamado como a mais alta inspiração do Homem; considerando que é essencial a
proteção dos direitos do Homem através de um regime de direito, para que o
Homem não seja compelido, em supremo recurso, à revolta contra a tirania e a
opressão; considerando que é essencial encorajar o desenvolvimento de relações
amistosas entre as nações; considerando que, na Carta, os povos das Nações
Unidas proclamam, de novo, a sua fé nos direitos fundamentais do Homem, na
dignidade e no valor da pessoa humana, na igualdade de direitos dos homens e
das mulheres e se declaram resolvidos a favorecer o progresso social e a
instaurar melhores condições

CONSIDERANDO QUE O RECONHECIMENTO DA DIGNIDADE INERENTE A TODOS OS MEMBROS DA
FAMÍLIA HUMANA E DOS SEUS DIREITOS IGUAIS E INALIENÁVEIS CONSTITUI O FUNDAMENTO
DA LIBERDADE, DA JUSTIÇA E DA PAZ NO MUNDO; CONSIDERANDO QUE O DESCONHECIMENTO
E O DESPREZO DOS DIREITOS DO HOMEN CONDUZIRAM A ACTOS DE BARBÁRIE QUE REVOLTAM
A CONSCIÊNCIA DAHUMANIDADE E QUE O ADVENTO DE UM MUNDO EM QUE OS SERES HUMANOS
SEJAM LIVRES DE FALAR E DE CRER, LIBERTOS DO TERROR E DA MISÉRIA, FOI
PROCLAMADO COMO A MAIS ALTA INSPIRAÇÃO DO HOMEM; CONSIDERANDO QUE É ESSENCIAL A
PROTEÇÃO DOS DIREITOS DO HOMEM ATRAVÉS DE UM REGIME DE DIREITO, PARA QUE O
HOMEM NÃO SEJA COMPELIDO, EM SUPREMO RECURSO, À REVOLTA CONTRA A TIRANIA E A
OPRESSÃO; CONSIDERANDO QUE É ESSENCIAL ENCORAJAR O DESENVOLVIMENTO DE RELAÇÕES
AMISTOSAS ENTRE AS NAÇÕES; CONSIDERANDO QUE, NA CARTA, OS POVOS DAS NAÇÕES
UNIDAS PROCLAMAM, DE NOVO, A SUA FÉ NOS DIREITOS FUNDAMENTAIS DO HOMEM, NA
DIGNIDADE E NO VALOR DA PESSOA HUMANA, NA IGUALDADE DE DIREITOS DOS HOMENS E
DAS MULHERES E SE DECLARAM RESOLVIDOS A FAVORECER O PROGRESSO SOCIAL E A
INSTAURAR MELHORES CONDIÇÕES



# ROMANIAN (ROMÂNA)

Considerînd că recunoașterea demnității inerente tuturor membrilor familiei
umane și a drepturilor lor egale și inalienabile constituie fundamentul
libertății, dreptății și păcii în lume, considerînd că ignorarea și
disprețuirea drepturilor omului au dus la acte de barbarie care revoltă
conștiința omenirii și că făurirea unei lumi în care ființele umane se vor
bucura de libertatea cuvîntului și a convingerilor și vor fi eliberate de teamă
și mizerie a fost proclamată drept cea mai înaltă aspirație a oamenilor,
considerînd că este esențial ca drepturile omului să fie ocrotite de
autoritatea legii pentru ca omul să nu fie silit să recurgă, ca soluție
extremă, la revoltă împotriva tiraniei și asupririi, considerînd că este
esențial a se încuraja dezvoltarea relațiilor prietenești între națiuni,
considerînd că în Cartă popoarele Organizației Națiunilor Unite au proclamat
din nou credința lor în drepturile fundamentale ale omului, în demnitatea și în
valoarea persoanei umane, drepturi egale pentru bărbați și femei și că au
hotărît să favorizeze progresul social și îmbunătățirea condițiilor de viață în
cadrul unei libertăți mai mari, considerînd că statele membre s-au

CONSIDERÎND CĂ RECUNOAȘTEREA DEMNITĂȚII INERENTE TUTUROR MEMBRILOR FAMILIEI
UMANE ȘI A DREPTURILOR LOR EGALE ȘI INALIENABILE CONSTITUIE FUNDAMENTUL
LIBERTĂȚII, DREPTĂȚII ȘI PĂCII ÎN LUME, CONSIDERÎND CĂ IGNORAREA ȘI
DISPREȚUIREA DREPTURILOR OMULUI AU DUS LA ACTE DE BARBARIE CARE REVOLTĂ
CONȘTIINȚA OMENIRII ȘI CĂ FĂURIREA UNEI LUMI ÎN CARE FIINȚELE UMANE SE VOR
BUCURA DE LIBERTATEA CUVÎNTULUI ȘI A CONVINGERILOR ȘI VOR FI ELIBERATE DE TEAMĂ
ȘI MIZERIE A FOST PROCLAMATĂ DREPT CEA MAI ÎNALTĂ ASPIRAȚIE A OAMENILOR,
CONSIDERÎND CĂ ESTE ESENȚIAL CA DREPTURILE OMULUI SĂ FIE OCROTITE DE
AUTORITATEA LEGII PENTRU CA OMUL SĂ NU FIE SILIT SĂ RECURGĂ, CA SOLUȚIE
EXTREMĂ, LA REVOLTĂ ÎMPOTRIVA TIRANIEI ȘI ASUPRIRII, CONSIDERÎND CĂ ESTE
ESENȚIAL A SE ÎNCURAJA DEZVOLTAREA RELAȚIILOR PRIETENEȘTI ÎNTRE NAȚIUNI,
CONSIDERÎND CĂ ÎN CARTĂ POPOARELE ORGANIZAȚIEI NAȚIUNILOR UNITE AU PROCLAMAT
DIN NOU CREDINȚA LOR ÎN DREPTURILE FUNDAMENTALE ALE OMULUI, ÎN DEMNITATEA ȘI ÎN
VALOAREA PERSOANEI UMANE, DREPTURI EGALE PENTRU BĂRBAȚI ȘI FEMEI ȘI CĂ AU
HOTĂRÎT SĂ FAVORIZEZE PROGRESUL SOCIAL ȘI ÎMBUNĂTĂȚIREA CONDIȚIILOR DE VIAȚĂ ÎN
CADRUL UNEI LIBERTĂȚI MAI MARI, CONSIDERÎND CĂ STATELE MEMBRE S-AU



# SLOVAK (SLOVENCINA)

Vo vedomí že uznanie prirodzenej dôstojnosti a rovnych a neodcudzite ľných práv
členov ľudskej rodiny je základom slobody, spravodlivosti a mieru na svete, že
zneuznanie ľudských práv a pohrdanie nimi viedlo k barbarským činom, ktoré
urážajú svedomie ľudstva, a že vybudovanie sveta, v ktorom ľudia, zbavení
strachu a núdze, budú sa tešiť slobode prejavu a presvedčenia, bolo vyhlásené
za najvyšší cieľ ľudu, že je nutné, aby sa ľudsk práva chránily zákonom, ak
nemá byť človek donúteý uchýliť sa, keď všetko ostatné zlyhalo, k odboju proti
tyranii a útlaku, že je nutné podporovať rozvoj priateľských vzťahov medzi
národmi, že ľud Spojených národov zdoraznil v Charte znovu svoju vieru v
základné ľudské práva, v dostojnosť a hodnotu ľudskej osobnosti, v rovnaké
práva mužov a žien a že sa rozhodol podporovať sociálny pokrok a vytvoriť
lepšie životné podmienky za vačšej slobody, že členské štáty prevzaly závazok
zaistiť v spolupráci s Organizáciou Spojeých národov všeobecné uznávanie a
zachovávanie ľudských práv a základýých slobod a že rovnaké chápanie týchto
práv a slobod má nesmierny význam pre dokonalé

VO VEDOMÍ ŽE UZNANIE PRIRODZENEJ DÔSTOJNOSTI A ROVNYCH A NEODCUDZITE ĽNÝCH PRÁV
ČLENOV ĽUDSKEJ RODINY JE ZÁKLADOM SLOBODY, SPRAVODLIVOSTI A MIERU NA SVETE, ŽE
ZNEUZNANIE ĽUDSKÝCH PRÁV A POHRDANIE NIMI VIEDLO K BARBARSKÝM ČINOM, KTORÉ
URÁŽAJÚ SVEDOMIE ĽUDSTVA, A ŽE VYBUDOVANIE SVETA, V KTOROM ĽUDIA, ZBAVENÍ
STRACHU A NÚDZE, BUDÚ SA TEŠIŤ SLOBODE PREJAVU A PRESVEDČENIA, BOLO VYHLÁSENÉ
ZA NAJVYŠŠÍ CIEĽ ĽUDU, ŽE JE NUTNÉ, ABY SA ĽUDSK PRÁVA CHRÁNILY ZÁKONOM, AK
NEMÁ BYŤ ČLOVEK DONÚTEÝ UCHÝLIŤ SA, KEĎ VŠETKO OSTATNÉ ZLYHALO, K ODBOJU PROTI
TYRANII A ÚTLAKU, ŽE JE NUTNÉ PODPOROVAŤ ROZVOJ PRIATEĽSKÝCH VZŤAHOV MEDZI
NÁRODMI, ŽE ĽUD SPOJENÝCH NÁRODOV ZDORAZNIL V CHARTE ZNOVU SVOJU VIERU V
ZÁKLADNÉ ĽUDSKÉ PRÁVA, V DOSTOJNOSŤ A HODNOTU ĽUDSKEJ OSOBNOSTI, V ROVNAKÉ
PRÁVA MUŽOV A ŽIEN A ŽE SA ROZHODOL PODPOROVAŤ SOCIÁLNY POKROK A VYTVORIŤ
LEPŠIE ŽIVOTNÉ PODMIENKY ZA VAČŠEJ SLOBODY, ŽE ČLENSKÉ ŠTÁTY PREVZALY ZÁVAZOK
ZAISTIŤ V SPOLUPRÁCI S ORGANIZÁCIOU SPOJEÝCH NÁRODOV VŠEOBECNÉ UZNÁVANIE A
ZACHOVÁVANIE ĽUDSKÝCH PRÁV A ZÁKLADÝÝCH SLOBOD A ŽE ROVNAKÉ CHÁPANIE TÝCHTO
PRÁV A SLOBOD MÁ NESMIERNY VÝZNAM PRE DOKONALÉ



# SPANISH (ESPAÑOL)

Considerando que la libertad, la justicia y la paz en el mundo tienen por base
el reconocimiento de la dignidad intrínseca y de los derechos iguales e
inalienables de todos los miembros de la familia humana, Considerando que el
desconocimiento y el menosprecio de los derechos humanos han originado actos de
barbarie ultrajantes para la conciencia de la humanidad; y que se ha
proclamado, como la aspiración más elevada del hombre, el advenimiento de un
mundo en que los seres humanos, liberados del temor y de la miseria, disfruten
de la libertad de palabra y de la libertad de creencias, Considerando esencial
que los derechos humanos sean protegidos por un régimen de Derecho, a fin de
que el hombre no se vea compelido al supremo recurso de la rebelión contra la
tiranía y la opresión, Considerando también esencial promover el desarrollo de
relaciones amistosas entre las naciones, Considerando que los pueblos de las
Naciones Unidas han reafirmado en la Carta su fe en los derechos fundamentales
del hombre, en la dignidad y el valor de la persona humana y en la igualdad de
derechos de hombres y mujeres; y se han

CONSIDERANDO QUE LA LIBERTAD, LA JUSTICIA Y LA PAZ EN EL MUNDO TIENEN POR BASE
EL RECONOCIMIENTO DE LA DIGNIDAD INTRÍNSECA Y DE LOS DERECHOS IGUALES E
INALIENABLES DE TODOS LOS MIEMBROS DE LA FAMILIA HUMANA, CONSIDERANDO QUE EL
DESCONOCIMIENTO Y EL MENOSPRECIO DE LOS DERECHOS HUMANOS HAN ORIGINADO ACTOS DE
BARBARIE ULTRAJANTES PARA LA CONCIENCIA DE LA HUMANIDAD; Y QUE SE HA
PROCLAMADO, COMO LA ASPIRACIÓN MÁS ELEVADA DEL HOMBRE, EL ADVENIMIENTO DE UN
MUNDO EN QUE LOS SERES HUMANOS, LIBERADOS DEL TEMOR Y DE LA MISERIA, DISFRUTEN
DE LA LIBERTAD DE PALABRA Y DE LA LIBERTAD DE CREENCIAS, CONSIDERANDO ESENCIAL
QUE LOS DERECHOS HUMANOS SEAN PROTEGIDOS POR UN RÉGIMEN DE DERECHO, A FIN DE
QUE EL HOMBRE NO SE VEA COMPELIDO AL SUPREMO RECURSO DE LA REBELIÓN CONTRA LA
TIRANÍA Y LA OPRESIÓN, CONSIDERANDO TAMBIÉN ESENCIAL PROMOVER EL DESARROLLO DE
RELACIONES AMISTOSAS ENTRE LAS NACIONES, CONSIDERANDO QUE LOS PUEBLOS DE LAS
NACIONES UNIDAS HAN REAFIRMADO EN LA CARTA SU FE EN LOS DERECHOS FUNDAMENTALES
DEL HOMBRE, EN LA DIGNIDAD Y EL VALOR DE LA PERSONA HUMANA Y EN LA IGUALDAD DE
DERECHOS DE HOMBRES Y MUJERES; Y SE HAN



# SWEDISH (SVENSKA)

Enär erkännandet av det inneboende värdet hos alla medlemmar av människosläktet
och av deras lika och oförytterliga rättigheter är grundvalen för frihet,
rättvisa och fred i världen, enär ringaktning och förakt för de mänskliga
rättigheterna lett till barbariska gärningar, som upprört mänsklighetens
samvete, och enär skapandet av en värld, där människorna åtnjuta
yttrandefrihet, trosfrihet samt frihet från fruktan och nöd, kungjorts som
folkens högsta strävan, enär det är väsentligt för att icke människan skall
tvingas att som en sista utväg tillgripa uppror mot tyranni och förtryck, att
de mänskliga rättigheterna skyddas genom lagens överhöghet, enär det är
väsentligt att främja utvecklandet av vänskapliga förbindelser mellan
nationerna, enär Förenta Nationernas folk i stadgan ånyo uttryckt sin tro på de
grundläggande mänskliga rättigheterna, den enskilda människans värdighet och
värde samt männens och kvinnornas lika rättigheter, ävensom beslutat främja
socialt framåtskridande och bättre levnadsvillkor under större frihet,

ENÄR ERKÄNNANDET AV DET INNEBOENDE VÄRDET HOS ALLA MEDLEMMAR AV MÄNNISKOSLÄKTET
OCH AV DERAS LIKA OCH OFÖRYTTERLIGA RÄTTIGHETER ÄR GRUNDVALEN FÖR FRIHET,
RÄTTVISA OCH FRED I VÄRLDEN, ENÄR RINGAKTNING OCH FÖRAKT FÖR DE MÄNSKLIGA
RÄTTIGHETERNA LETT TILL BARBARISKA GÄRNINGAR, SOM UPPRÖRT MÄNSKLIGHETENS
SAMVETE, OCH ENÄR SKAPANDET AV EN VÄRLD, DÄR MÄNNISKORNA ÅTNJUTA
YTTRANDEFRIHET, TROSFRIHET SAMT FRIHET FRÅN FRUKTAN OCH NÖD, KUNGJORTS SOM
FOLKENS HÖGSTA STRÄVAN, ENÄR DET ÄR VÄSENTLIGT FÖR ATT ICKE MÄNNISKAN SKALL
TVINGAS ATT SOM EN SISTA UTVÄG TILLGRIPA UPPROR MOT TYRANNI OCH FÖRTRYCK, ATT
DE MÄNSKLIGA RÄTTIGHETERNA SKYDDAS GENOM LAGENS ÖVERHÖGHET, ENÄR DET ÄR
VÄSENTLIGT ATT FRÄMJA UTVECKLANDET AV VÄNSKAPLIGA FÖRBINDELSER MELLAN
NATIONERNA, ENÄR FÖRENTA NATIONERNAS FOLK I STADGAN ÅNYO UTTRYCKT SIN TRO PÅ DE
GRUNDLÄGGANDE MÄNSKLIGA RÄTTIGHETERNA, DEN ENSKILDA MÄNNISKANS VÄRDIGHET OCH
VÄRDE SAMT MÄNNENS OCH KVINNORNAS LIKA RÄTTIGHETER, ÄVENSOM BESLUTAT FRÄMJA
SOCIALT FRAMÅTSKRIDANDE OCH BÄTTRE LEVNADSVILLKOR UNDER STÖRRE FRIHET,



# TURKISH (TÜRKÇE)

İnsanlık ailesinin bütün üyelerinde bulunan haysiyetin ve bunların eşit ve
devir kabul etmez haklarının tanınması hususunun, hürriyetin, adaletin ve dünya
barışının temeli olmasına, ınsan haklarının tanınmaması ve hor görülmesinin
insanlık vicdanını isyana sevkeden vahşiliklere sebep olmuş bulunmasına,
dehşetten ve yoksulluktan kurtulmuş insanların, içinde söz ve inanma
hürriyetlerine sahip olacakları bir dünyanın kurulması en yüksek amaçları
oralak ilan edilmiş bulunmasına, ınsanin zulüm ve baskıya karşı son çare olarak
ayaklanmaya mecbur kalmaması için insan haklarının bir hukuk rejimi ile
korunmasının esaslı bir zaruret olmasına, uluslararasında dostça ilişkiler
geliştirilmesini teşvik etmenin esaslı bir zaruret olmasına, birleşmiş
Milletler halklarının, Antlaşmada, insanın ana haklarına, insan şahsının
haysiyet ve değerine, erkek ve kadınların eşitliğine olan imanlarını bir kere
daha ilan etmiş olmalarına ve sosyal ilerlemeyi kolaylaştırmaya, daha geniş bir
hürriyet içerisinde daha iyi hayat şartları kurmaya karar verdiklerini beyan
etmiş bulunmalarına, üye devletlerin, birleşmiş Milletler Teşkilatı ile
işbirliği ederek insan

İNSANLIK AILESININ BÜTÜN ÜYELERINDE BULUNAN HAYSIYETIN VE BUNLARIN EŞIT VE
DEVIR KABUL ETMEZ HAKLARININ TANINMASI HUSUSUNUN, HÜRRIYETIN, ADALETIN VE DÜNYA
BARIŞININ TEMELI OLMASINA, INSAN HAKLARININ TANINMAMASI VE HOR GÖRÜLMESININ
INSANLIK VICDANINI ISYANA SEVKEDEN VAHŞILIKLERE SEBEP OLMUŞ BULUNMASINA,
DEHŞETTEN VE YOKSULLUKTAN KURTULMUŞ INSANLARIN, IÇINDE SÖZ VE INANMA
HÜRRIYETLERINE SAHIP OLACAKLARI BIR DÜNYANIN KURULMASI EN YÜKSEK AMAÇLARI
ORALAK ILAN EDILMIŞ BULUNMASINA, INSANIN ZULÜM VE BASKIYA KARŞI SON ÇARE OLARAK
AYAKLANMAYA MECBUR KALMAMASI IÇIN INSAN HAKLARININ BIR HUKUK REJIMI ILE
KORUNMASININ ESASLI BIR ZARURET OLMASINA, ULUSLARARASINDA DOSTÇA ILIŞKILER
GELIŞTIRILMESINI TEŞVIK ETMENIN ESASLI BIR ZARURET OLMASINA, BIRLEŞMIŞ
MILLETLER HALKLARININ, ANTLAŞMADA, INSANIN ANA HAKLARINA, INSAN ŞAHSININ
HAYSIYET VE DEĞERINE, ERKEK VE KADINLARIN EŞITLIĞINE OLAN IMANLARINI BIR KERE
DAHA ILAN ETMIŞ OLMALARINA VE SOSYAL ILERLEMEYI KOLAYLAŞTIRMAYA, DAHA GENIŞ BIR
HÜRRIYET IÇERISINDE DAHA IYI HAYAT ŞARTLARI KURMAYA KARAR VERDIKLERINI BEYAN
ETMIŞ BULUNMALARINA, ÜYE DEVLETLERIN, BIRLEŞMIŞ MILLETLER TEŞKILATI ILE
IŞBIRLIĞI EDEREK INSAN



# WELSH (CYMRAEG)

Gan mai cydnabod urddas cynhenid a hawliau cydradd a phriod holl aelodau’r
teulu dynol yw sylfaen rhyddid, cyfiawnder a heddwch yn y byd, gan i anwybyddu
a dirmygu hawliau dynol arwain at weithredoedd barbaraidd a dreisiodd gydwybod
dynolryw, a bod dyfodiad byd lle y gall pob unigolyn fwynhau rhyddid i siarad a
chredu a rhyddid rhag ofn ac angau wedi ei gyhoeddi yn ddyhead uchaf y bobl
gyffredin, gan fod yn rhaid amddiffyn hawliau dynol a rheolaeth cyfraith, os
nad yw pob unigolyn dan orfod yn y pendraw i wrthryfela yn erbyn gormes a
thrais, gan fod yn rhaid hyrwyddo cysylltiadau cyfeillgar rhwng Cenhedloedd,
gan fod pobloedd y Cenhedloedd Unedig yn y Siarter wedi ail ddatgan ffydd mewn
hawliau sylfaenol yr unigolyn, mewn urddas a gwerth y person dynol ac mewn
hawliau cydradd gŵr a gwragedd, ac wedi penderfynu hyrwyddo cynnydd
cymdeithasol a safonau byw gwell mewn rhyddid helaethach, gan fod y
Gwladwriaethau sy’n Aelodau wedi ymrwymo, mewn cydweithrediad â’r Cenhedloedd
Unedig, i sicrhau hyrwyddo parch cyffredinol i hawliau dynol a’r rhyddfreintiau
sylfaenol,

GAN MAI CYDNABOD URDDAS CYNHENID A HAWLIAU CYDRADD A PHRIOD HOLL AELODAU’R
TEULU DYNOL YW SYLFAEN RHYDDID, CYFIAWNDER A HEDDWCH YN Y BYD, GAN I ANWYBYDDU
A DIRMYGU HAWLIAU DYNOL ARWAIN AT WEITHREDOEDD BARBARAIDD A DREISIODD GYDWYBOD
DYNOLRYW, A BOD DYFODIAD BYD LLE Y GALL POB UNIGOLYN FWYNHAU RHYDDID I SIARAD A
CHREDU A RHYDDID RHAG OFN AC ANGAU WEDI EI GYHOEDDI YN DDYHEAD UCHAF Y BOBL
GYFFREDIN, GAN FOD YN RHAID AMDDIFFYN HAWLIAU DYNOL A RHEOLAETH CYFRAITH, OS
NAD YW POB UNIGOLYN DAN ORFOD YN Y PENDRAW I WRTHRYFELA YN ERBYN GORMES A
THRAIS, GAN FOD YN RHAID HYRWYDDO CYSYLLTIADAU CYFEILLGAR RHWNG CENHEDLOEDD,
GAN FOD POBLOEDD Y CENHEDLOEDD UNEDIG YN Y SIARTER WEDI AIL DDATGAN FFYDD MEWN
HAWLIAU SYLFAENOL YR UNIGOLYN, MEWN URDDAS A GWERTH Y PERSON DYNOL AC MEWN
HAWLIAU CYDRADD GŴR A GWRAGEDD, AC WEDI PENDERFYNU HYRWYDDO CYNNYDD
CYMDEITHASOL A SAFONAU BYW GWELL MEWN RHYDDID HELAETHACH, GAN FOD Y
GWLADWRIAETHAU SY’N AELODAU WEDI YMRWYMO, MEWN CYDWEITHREDIAD Â’R CENHEDLOEDD
UNEDIG, I SICRHAU HYRWYDDO PARCH CYFFREDINOL I HAWLIAU DYNOL A’R RHYDDFREINTIAU
SYLFAENOL,
